okay welcome back to NLP we've got
topic that of
aggression so what sense disambiguation
as you can imagine from the name is
about automatically recognizing which of
multiple meanings of ambiguous words is
being used in a specific sentence so
words have different properties we have
seen this before one of them is polysemy
belief submit just means it's many words
have multiple senses so here's an
example let's have a drink in the bar
the word bar in the sentence means the
drinking establishment however in
general the word bar has many other
meanings so for example chocolate bar is
another meaning of the word bar I have
to study for the bar another meaning of
bar in this case it means some exam for
lawyers and bring me a chocolate bar and
so on another property of word is kumano
me so for example I am in and let's meet
again in May the word May appears in
both sentences it's pronounced the exact
same way and it means something
completely different different books
make different distinctions between
polysemy and hamana me so for the
purposes of this class we're going to
focus on examples that are not hamona me
by accident so for example the word may
here is a verb an auxiliary verb and the
word may in the second sentence is a
month so clearly those words are very
different they're different parts of
speech and so on so we're not going to
be worrying about them so much we're
mostly going to worry about words most
typically nouns that have multiple
meanings so we're not going to worry
about words like around being a verb or
an adjective or now this is not part of
what we'll do so what are all the
different senses of bar according to
ordinate well this is the first one here
bar or also borrow more saloon is a room
or establishment where alcoholic drinks
assert over counter not a sense is a
counter we can obtain food or drink so
this is the actual physical piece of
furniture on top of which you get the
drink then bar is a rigid piece of metal
or wood used for fastening or
obstruction or weapon and I can bars in
the jail next thing is some bar in music
and many many other sciences I already
spent a lot
it's going through all of them in detail
so just let me just show you the list
here as you can see there's more than a
dozen of those so let's go back to word
sense disambiguation so as I said before
its main goal is to take a word like bar
that has multiple senses that are
numbered let's say one to 15 and then in
a given sentence to tell us which of
those 15 meanings is being used so we
see we could have to do this in context
that's why we typically get access to
the entire sentence and often to the
entire paragraph or document in which
the word appears so we'd say this
implication is a very important
component of natural language processing
systems because it's used for example to
come up with better semantic
representations of sentences and also
for question answering and for things
like machine translation obviously if a
word is ambiguous in one language that
doesn't mean that it is necessarily
ambiguous in another language so for
example if you want to translate the
sentence with the word play in English
into Spanish we need to understand what
is the object being played so for
example in English we say play the
violin in Spanish this is translated
with the verb took our lvling and then
in the sentence paid tennis we're going
to use a different for jugar al tenis
soto car and jugar are two different
translations of play and if we couldn't
do proper word sense disambiguation in
english we wouldn't be able to translate
those sentences into Spanish cracking
and the many other uses of word sizes
immigration for example for accent
restoration so the word co te in french
means different things and it's
pronounced differently depending on
where the accents appear so it could be
something like caught which is a cause
to cote which is side and so on
another uses text-to-speech generation
so in this case we may have a word that
has multiple pronunciations depending on
the meaning so for example lead or lead
in English and then spelling correction
so we can we want to be able to
distinguish between words like Aid and
AIDS with an E and finally
capitalization or restoration so we have
a word like Turkey if we know its
meaning as a bird or as a country we can
properly
capitalize it in some text that is not
capitalized to start with so let me now
go over some of the common techniques
used in word sense disambiguation
starting with a very old method by
Michael asked the so called dictionary
method the idea behind a dictionary
method is that if you have ambiguous
words in a sentence that appear together
you're going to find all the possible
meanings of each of those words and then
look up the dictionary definitions of
all the senses of those words and then
look for pairs of dictionary definitions
one for each of the biggest words that
overlap the most so here's how it works
we want to match the sentence to a
dictionary definition let's look at the
sentence that has two ambiguous words
the first one of those is plant which
according to the merriam-webster
dictionary has many senses the first one
of them is a living thing that goes in
the ground usually has leaves or flowers
and needs Sun and water to survive and
then we have a second interpretation of
plant which we're going to call plant
two which is defined as a building or
factory where something is made so that
example is the word leaf so the two
definitions that we're going to consider
are leaf one which is a lateral
outgrowth from a plant stem that is
typically flattened expanded very oddly
shaped greenish organ constitutes a unit
of the foliage and functions primarily
in food manufactured by photosynthesis
and then leave to is a part of a book or
folded sheet containing a page on each
side so now suppose it we have a
sentence like this the leaf is the food
making factory of green plants so we
have the word leaf in the word plants
and we want to determine which of the
senses of those are used in the sentence
so we have four possible combinations
leaf one plant one leaf one plant two
and so on so which one of those are we
going to pick well we're going to look
for the overlap in the dictionary
definitions and pick the one that has
the largest one okay so another method
that was introduced in the early 90s
will by David Lee Roth's key who was at
UPenn at that time is the decision list
method
so here's how it works it is based on
the principle $0.01 per collocation so
in a previous lecture we talked about
collocations so if I say living plant
the word plant is ambiguous but the fact
that it appears near the word living as
part of a collocation means that we have
the first sense of the word plant
instead if we have something like
manufacturing plant then clearly we have
the second sense of plant so the
question is can we come up with a list
of such collocations that can give us
hints to the disambiguation of the
ambiguous words the RFC's method is
based on the idea that we are going to
look at only two senses per word and
we're going to try to come up with a
list an ordered list of rules
collocation gives sense so if we have a
collocation for that ambiguous word we
can automatically determine which sense
we have and the formula that is used for
ordering those rules in the decision
list is the following we have log of the
probability of sense a given collocation
I divided by the probability of sense be
given collocation I so since it's a
decision list method we have to sort
those who've by this formula and then
whenever we have a new instance of an
ambiguous noun we're going to go through
the list and pick the first item
starting from the top that matches and
then label the word accordingly and then
stop so here's an example with decision
lists from there ask a paper from 1994
he looks not only at collocations that
consist of two words right in a specific
order he also looks at words within a
certain window of many words so for
example if we have to disambiguate the
word Vass which by the way can also have
multiple pronunciations for example bass
or bass now we're going to look at the
following rules if the word fish appears
within the window we're going to label
this as bass sense one if this doesn't
hold we're going to look at the next
tool down the list
so if we have the collocations trapped
followed by ba SS we're again going to
label that occurrence as bass one the
next rule in the list is guitar within
window so if you have the would be a SS
and the word guitar nearby we now know
that we have the second sense of that
word those bass ba SS 2 and so on so
I'll have a few more examples here bass
player indicates ba SS sense number 2
and then play as a verb followed by ba
SS this is also bas 2 and so on so we
have rules that alternate between bas s1
and bas s2 so now let's look at a more
detailed list of the type of features
that are used in the year oscar decision
list algorithm I mentioned collocations
those are the JSON words on one side or
the other of the word for example for
the word bar that could be chocolate bar
bar exam bar stool bar fight or for
words like aid it could be foreign aid
which is one sense vs. presidential aide
which is not sense we can also look at
the position it is important to realize
that the collocation I plant pesticide
is different from the collocation
pesticide plant the first one refers to
the living thing sense of plant the
second one refers to the factory sense
of plan so position matters we can also
look at the adjacent parts of speech so
we want to know if the word that follows
is a verb or an adjective and so on we
can also look at all the other nearby
words let's say within the window of
class or five words or in the entire
sentence and we can also look at
syntactic information for example what
is the subject of that word and what is
the object of that word and so on so for
example for the word play we can look
for the specific object whether it's
guitar or tennis and then determine the
cents from that information and the
overall topic of the text is very
important so one of the principles that
you are asking to reduced in one of the
more recent papers was the support $0.01
per discourse principle which said that
most of the time if an ambiguous word
appears in a paragraph or a document
it's most likely to continue to keep the
same sense
within this entire discourse so now
let's step back for a moment they look
at some general classification methods
that can be used for word sense
disambiguation so what does this
implication that sense is not different
from many other classification points in
natural language processing such as
named entity classification or question
type classification that we have
discussed previously so one of the most
common techniques used is the K nearest
neighbor classification method also
known as the memory based method so the
idea is this you look at some current
problem for example this is what is the
sense of this word in this context and
then you look in your history of
training data for similar examples and
you figure out what decision you made at
that time and then that gives you the
decision to make in the current time as
well so typically people use a vector
representation of each instance that
needs to be classified and then they
measure the Euclidean distance between
that instance and all of the other
instances so here's an example we have a
coordinate system here in two dimensions
again in the more general case this is a
much more dimensional vector and then we
have a red objects here that form one
cluster for example sense 1 we have blue
clusters that blue points that form
another cluster for sense two and now we
are given with a new object here and we
want to determine how to classify it so
in a key nearest neighbor algorithm
we're going to look at its nearest
neighbor one nearest neighbor in this
case it's a red dot therefore we're
going to classify it as red it is also
possible to increase the value of K to
some larger odd number for example 3 or
5 so in the case of K equals 3 we're
going to look at the three closest
examples in this vector space to the one
that we want to classify and then look
at the majority class among them and we
turn that as the correct answer so in
this example we have among the three
nearest neighbors we have two red
examples and one blue example therefore
we're going to label the hollow example
as red as well okay now let's move now
to another method also introduced by
David you are asked in the mid 90s
called bootstrapping so bootstrapping is
an example something called
semi-supervised learning and it has
become one of the most influential
algorithms not only in word sense
disambiguation but also in many other
NOP and machine learning problems so
this how it works we're going to start
with one ambiguous word for example the
word plant two senses let's say the
living thing in the manufacturing sense
and we want to come up with one very
strong collocation that is indicative of
each of those senses so for example for
plant one we're going to pick the word
leaf and for plant two we're going to
pick the word factory so now we're going
to do the classifier that looks at all
the unlabeled data and if it sees that
the word plant appears near leaf it will
label in a sense one and if it sees
factory to label it a sense to now since
those are only single examples for each
of the classes we can only label a small
percentage of the data let's say for the
sake of the example that 1% is labeled
as plant one 1% is labeled as pan 2 and
the rest 98% is not labeled yet okay so
how does the bootstrapping process works
so now we're going to do the classifier
that is going to look for other objects
that have not that were not classified
previously and it's going to look for
additional collocations that appear in
those labeled examples so for example if
we have a sentence where the word plant
appears near leaf leaf and near living
we use leaf already as a feature but now
we can learn that living it's also a
good feature that labels that particular
sense so somehow in the process of
bootstrapping we're going to expand from
the first seeds to some small number of
labeled examples then back to more
features that are associated with each
of those classes and then I get buy and
eat training a supervisor pacifier we're
going to get more label data and so on
and this process is going to continue
until pretty much all of the data points
have been classified one way or the
other so bootstrapping to summarize is
based on two important principles both
introduced by David arouse key the
principle one sense for colocation so
again given an ambiguous
word what word appear nears it may help
this emigrate the first one and also
$0.01 per discourse meaning that all the
instances of a word of an ambiguous word
in the same discourse unit are likely to
have the same sense so some of those
methods that I mentioned before we're
trainable so the question comes now
where do we get training data from word
sense disambiguation well there are
several different places where we can go
one is to go to the sense of our the
same core data sets which are available
from public evaluation of sense
disambiguation systems this can be
obtained from the sense of audit or
website and sense of our is an annual
competition that was done in two
different events the first event was the
lexical sample task where there was
training data for a small set of words
things like bar and plant and board each
of which appearing in sentences that
were annotated with the proper census in
the second event or the second task was
a so-called old words disambiguation
tasks that's where all the words in a
given document had to be disambiguate
now in each of those cases the census in
this manual annotation were obtained
from wordnet so since about data and
more recently some of our data is
available in many different languages in
addition to English of languages like
Spanish and Romanian and Dutch and so on
another way to train data for word sense
disambiguation
is to use the so called pseudo words
principle the pseudo voice principle
says that we can take a word that is not
ambiguous and another word that is not
ambiguous and combine them into a new
word that has all the instances of both
of the an ambiguous word so for example
every time we see the word banana we
want to replace it with a single token
that stands for banana or door and we're
going to do the same thing for every
occurrence of the word door in the
document so we have those tokens that
could be either one or the other and
then we can train this we can train a
classifier because we know in each
instance
what was the actual word that was used
so the word sense disambiguation system
is going to see this collapsed word and
it will try to guess the correct word
and if they are so multilingual corpora
that are aligned at the sentence level
so for example if the word play in
English is aligned to jugar or tocar in
Spanish we can use that information as
training data for word sense
disambiguation so some brief results
from one of the earlier sense of our
evaluations the metric that is used in
words as this abrogation is based on the
following quantities a is the number of
assigned senses C's the number of words
that are assigned correct senses T is
the total number of test words in the
evaluation and then precision is C
divided by a and HECO is C divided by T
so just our basic precision and recall
valuation metrics and to give an idea of
the results the best performance in
sense of our one was around 77%
precision and soundness and 1% reco
whereas the best that human
lexicographers could get was in the high
ninety percent and the one interesting
realistic is that if you have an ordered
list of senses for each words with the
most common sense appearing first you
get some decent performance 57 percent
precision 50 percent or eco we just do
not close it at all to the best
automatic systems but still gives you a
decent baseline one caveat here however
is that this method works better if the
text is relatively homogeneous in terms
of a genre and domain
once you have text that text there at
our for multiple genres or domains this
method is unlikely to work because the
most common sense of that word changes
according to the domain so this
concludes the section on word sense
disambiguation